 You probably know David Byrne as the lead singer and songwriter of Talking Heads, the hugely
influential post-punk rock band of the late 1970s and 80s. They broke up more than 30 years ago, but
Byrne has been on his own eclectic journey ever since. His artistic innovations have blurred the
boundaries of music, theater, and art. He's won an Oscar, Grammy, and a Tony. He was a source of
singers, collaborated with neuroscientists, made movies, and this summer his musical about the
former First Lady of the Philippines and Melda Marcos opens on Broadway. David Byrne is 71, and as
we first told you earlier this year, he is as creative, energetic and unusual as he was when he was
23. An art school dropout just starting to perform on stage with his friends as Talking Heads. The
story will continue in a moment. The name of this band is Talking Heads, and the name of this song
is Psycho Killer. So I want to be very man-refact. It's not like, are we having fun tonight? Yeah,
there's none of that. There's none of that how you do all doing. How you all doing New York? New
York! This is one of David Byrne's first performances. It was 1975 at CBGB's. A legendary music club
where the Ramones, Patty Smith, and Blondie were also just getting started. Psycho Killer was only
the second song David Byrne had ever written, and it was Talking Heads first hit. When you hear it
now, what do you think? I'm glad I did it, but I'm also glad that I didn't stick with that. As Mike,
oh, like, oh, this is working. Let's do more like this. I'm glad that I decided, no, now you have to
do things that are a little more original, musically. And that's exactly what he did. Along with
Tina Weymouth, Chris Frans, and Jerry Harrison, talking Heads put out eight albums over the next 13
years. They were edgy, groundbreaking, critically acclaimed, and a commercial hit. Milding Rock with
Funk, Disco, Afrobeat, and the Avant Garde. He'd all studied art in college, and it showed in their
music videos, which were in heavy rotation on MTV. Bruns quirky movements and manner got most of the
attention, which was not always easy for the introverted singer. Dick Clark tried to ask him about
it on American bandstand in 1979. Are you a shy person? I'd say so. It seems contradictory to a lot
of people. The introvert who winds up on the stage in front of thousands of people performing and
reaching great heights. It does seem contradictory, but in retrospect, it makes perfect sense. Your
way of announcing your existence and communicating your thoughts to people is through performance.
And then I could retreat into my shell after that, but I'd made myself known to these people and
what I was thinking and what I was feeling. So when that's your only option, it's a life saver.
David Burns' shyness goes way back. He was born in Scotland, but his family moved to Baltimore when
he was eight. His accent was so thick, classmates could barely understand him. He was an outsider,
happier making music at home and his basement with a real to real tape recorder than hanging out
with other kids. My discomfort with kind of social situations meant as often happens, I would focus
intently on my drawings or learning to place others' people's songs or things like that and that
continued for ages. And he comes ultra-focused. So that becomes a well-kind of superpower. Ultra-
focused may be a superpower, but it caused problems between Burns and the band that flared up on
tour in 1983. I became kind of obsessive about getting that show up and running. I might not have
been the most pleasant person to deal with at that point. Demanding. Yes. Yes. Burn Commanded Center
Stage, famously wearing this outrageously oversized suit. The show was made into a film by director
Jonathan Demme called Stop Making Sense. It's considered one of the greatest concert movies ever.
Teen heads made three more albums, but Burn was increasingly branching out on his own. As I became
more relaxed as a person, started writing different kinds of songs, songs that maybe weren't quite
as angst-ridden and peculiar, some fans were probably disappointed. We liked the really quirky guy,
but we liked the guy who was really struggling with himself and really having a hard time. I
thought, why would you wish that on me? For your own amusement, right? I could be you and you could
be me. In 1988, you founded a world music label. Everyone's having a different one. Then released an
album of Latin songs and wrote music for films, dance companies, and experimental theater. I
genuinely started having other kind of musical interests. You'd start to collaborate with a lot of
artists from different genres. Yes. And I thought, I want to do more of that. But by then, it was
pretty much over. There was never an official announcement, but eventually Burn made an offhand
comment to a reporter that talking heads had broken up. He neglected, it seems, to tell the band.
Members of the band said that you never actually talked to them and said that the band was over,
that they read about it in their newspaper. I don't know if that's the case, but it might be. I
think it is very possible that I did not handle it as best as I could. Burn never looked back, and
he's followed his own beat ever since. No matter how offbeat it may be. Ten years ago, Burn staged a
pop opera in collaboration with Fat Boy Slim called Here Lies Love. It's about, of all people, a
male to Marcos, the wife of the former dictator of the Philippines. It's now scheduled to open on
Broadway this summer. When he became fascinated with high school color guard teams in 2015, he wound
up staging arena shows combining the team's flag-spinning, weapon tossing and dance to the pop music
of Nelly Frittado and St. Vincent. I thought, oh, this is just going to be highlighting their talent
and putting people together who would never normally be together. And wasn't until I saw the show
and I realized this is not about this at all. What it's really delivering is this message about
inclusion. That's what this is about. They kind of revealed it. But isn't that extraordinary that
you can start doing something with one thing in mind and yet it has a life of its own? I trust what
I do and what other people do that way, that it's going to deliver what it wants to say. But someone
else looking at it could go, what are you talking about? You don't know what you're doing? You don't
know why you're doing it? You don't know where it's going to end up. Yeah, that's just kind of
trusted. Yeah. He is a small studio in his New York City apartment where he tinkers with lyrics and
new ideas, much like he did all those years ago in his parents' basement. First stands, it sounds
like it might be promising. Do you stop and kind of ruminate on things and come back to it and know?
Yeah, I might see if I get it like a chorus or something. I might try it like a chorus. It's stood
by me when darkness fell. My apartment is my friend. That's the key line, so that's got to be pretty
good. Bern is the quintessential New Yorker. He's lived in the city for five decades and it's not
uncommon to see him peddling around on his bicycle. He is, it seems, always on the move, always
exploring. Oh, yeah. His downtown office is lined with books, records and odd mementos. He's picked
up here and there. This wonderful wine for Turkmenistan. Hidden amid the clutter. There's a Grammy
and his 1988 Oscar for composing the soundtrack for the film The Last Emperor. It's not on the
lowest shelf. I mean, David, really? Does the Academy know about this? You know, when you go into
somebody's office and they have all their awards? Yes, it's a whole frame, all around the magazine
covers. You don't have an ego wall. His office is where he runs reasons to be cheerful. Oh, that
could be nice. An online magazine highlighting creative solutions to complex problems from
reinventing food banks in Chicago to turning French parking lots into solar farms. So are there
reasons to be cheerful? Oh, yeah, yeah. If you get up in the morning and start doom scrolling
through your phone or your tablet or laptop or whatever, you're going to think, no, no, no, no. The
world's going to hell on a handbasket. But there are people and places, organizations doing things
that are really making a difference, finding solutions to things. Who am I? What do I want? How do I
work this? That optimism infused a hit Broadway show, Burn Created and starred in called American
Utopia. It's actually like the performance branch of Reason's David Cheerful. This is really about
the hope and possibility and what, how we can work together as people. You're me standing on sub. Oh
God. What have I done? I'm getting this over. I'm getting this over. I'm getting this over. He mixed
his old songs with new ones. Well, everybody's coming to town. And I'm never going to be alone. Burn
wanted the musicians to be completely untethered. They're going them to move freely around the
stage. It was less a Broadway musical, more a rockous revival. I'm losing my foot, not through fire,
maybe, I'm where you are. I'm falling for fire. There's this amazing feeling when music like that is
all around you, when there's a whole group of people who are making music. It's not just like one
soloist or something like that. It's this collective thing that gives it this extra energy. Burn it
down the house. Oh yeah. Burn's latest theatrical experience may be his most unusual yet. It's an
interactive journey into his past called Theodore the Mind, produced in collaboration with the
Denver Center for Performing Arts. Audience members get random name tags and are led on a semi-
autobiographical tour of Burn's memories. Like this outer proportioned kitchen makes anyone in it
feel like a child. Do this with me. Hold your hand in front of your face. The show is full of
surprises the audience takes part in, some of them based on neuroscience experiments. We agree not
to give them away, but they make you question your own perception and perhaps your memories. It is
dark in here. You know what? Theodore the Mind ends in a replica of his parents attic. Like Burn's
life the show tells a story about how over time our identities are malleable and how we all have the
capacity to change. We're never stuck. You can change the story anytime. Isn't that nice? I like
that idea that you can change your story. You can change the narrative. It would be a horrible world
if people never change for their entire life or they were an angry person or an upset person or
depressed person and it's like that's your fate, but that's not true. Do you think you've changed
that much? I feel like, yeah, I'm a very different person than I was when I was young. Were you
conscious of those changes? Sometimes my friends would say, you're really different than what you
used to be when I first met you. You're a really different person now. By the way, were they saying
that in a nice way or was that being yelled out of the top of their lungs? It was a nice way. It was
like, wow, you've really changed. The stories behind hit songs from Talking Heads. It was inspired
by Alice Cooper and Randy Newman. At 60MinutesOverTime.com.