 Tonight, you're going to hear from a former senior staffer inside the January 6th Committee, which
resumes public hearings on the Capitol Siege Wednesday. Members of the Committee aren't happy that
Denver Rigelman, an experienced military intelligence officer and former Republican Congressman, is
talking to 60 minutes about the work he did for them. Nor are they thrilled he's written a book
about his time on the Committee called The Breach. Washington has a history of swimming against the
tide. Once a member of the ultra conservative House Freedom Caucus, he was endorsed twice by then
President Trump. But after hearing what Denver Rigelman has to say tonight, it's unlikely the former
president will be buying his book. The story will continue in a moment. Did it hit you at one point
that this is way bigger than it appeared in the beginning? Absolutely. Do you get a real aha moment
when you see that the White House switchboard had connected to a rioter's phone while it's
happening? That's a pretty big aha moment. You get a aha moment. Wait a minute. Someone in the White
House was calling one of the rioters while the riot was going on. On January 6th. Absolutely. And
you know who both ends of that call. I only know one end of that call. I don't know the White House
end. Which I believe is more important. But the things the American people need to know that there
are link connections that need to be explored more. As senior technical advisor for the January 6th
committee, Denver Rigelman, a former House Republican and ex-military intelligence officer, ran a
data-driven operation pursuing phone records and other digital clues tied to the attack on the
Capitol. From my perspective, you know, being in counterterrorism, you know, if the White House,
even if it's a short call and it's a connected call, who is actually making that phone call. Is
there a simple innocent explanation for that? It was an accidental call. From the White House, it
just happened to call numbers that somebody misdialled a rioter that day on January 6th. Probably
not. Denver Rigelman told us he uncovered a lot of disquieting information for the committee. Do you
swear or affirm under penalty of perjury? Republican vice chair Liz Cheney recommended the former
conservative congressman for the staff, partly for his political experience, but mostly for his
technical expertise. I think Liz and some of the other people recognized he does know how Congress
works. He knows how the political system works. He was in the Freedom Caucus, but he also has a
background in data intelligence. For two decades, he served as an Air Force Intelligence Officer, a
contractor for the Secret of National Security Agency, and ran his own data analysis firm. When the
January 6th committee came calling, he assembled a small squad of data miners and analysts, like
he'd had in the military, to comb through 20 million lines of data, emails, social media posts,
phone records, texts, anything to learn who did what, leading up to and on January 6th. We were able
to do things in a way that had never been done before with millions of lines of data, and to
actually create a graph that shows how these groups actually intermingled. Now you were able to
identify, I believe, six centers of gravity? Yeah, there are six pretty big centers of gravity.
There are six groups that we looked at, and really it came down to Trump team, Trump family, rally
goers, unaffiliated DOJ charge defendants, proud boys and oath keepers, and others, which are state
legislators, alternate electors, things like that. So when you have those six groups of people, you
can actually start looking at the connections between them. Once he started connecting the dots,
this complex graph emerged, which he presented to the committee. Each thick line represents tens of
thousands of calls and contacts among and between the groups, zoom in to see the details. These are
calls and texts from just one person of interest. You can identify that hundreds of times and you
end up with this graph, Rigloman calls the monster. We don't have text content. What we do have is
how long they talked. When they talked, that is very important. And really does suggest that there
was much more coordination in the American public can even imagine when it came to January 6th. For
example, the data revealed five calls in the weeks before January 6th between the White House and
this woman. We are the storm! A stop-to-steel activist named Bianca Grasia. The committee obtained
this video from the evening of January 5th. Grasia was part of a clandestine meeting with the heads
of the proud boys and oath keepers, the paramilitary groups that would breach the capital the next
day. And when you have the White House switchboard and certain other cell phone numbers connected to
Bianca Grasia, that is a link that needs to be investigated. The thread that needs to be pulled is
identifying all the White House numbers and why we have certain specific people, why they were
talking to the White House. Specific White House phone records are kept secret to protect every
administration. But in his book, The Breach, Rigloman wrote, he begged the committee to push harder
to identify numbers that showed up on the monster. I was one of those individuals, sadly, at the
beginning, you know, where I was very, very aggressive about these link connections, getting those
White House phone numbers. Did you express those concerns to the committee at the time? Yes. What
was the response? The response was, go forth and just do the best you can with the resources that we
have. Rigloman requested $3.2 million, but only received a fraction of that. His team furrowed into
the data. The mother load dropped into their laps, not just phone records, but more than 2,000
actual texts, two and from Mark Meadows, former President Trump's chief of staff. There were
numbers, but no names. So Rigloman told us his team made a giant spreadsheet, painstakingly
identifying the people behind each number. And when they did, they were privy to the real-time
thoughts of Trump family members, former cabinet secretaries, members of Congress, conspiracy
mongers, even a Supreme Court justices wife. You've called the texts from President Trump's chief of
staff, Mark Meadows, the Crown Jewels. Why? It was a roadmap. You know, it showed actually the
evolution of the beginning arguments from alternate electors all the way through rally planning, all
the way to day of. It showed conspiracy theories. It showed the saturation of QAnon. How'd you get
him? He gave him up. Do you think it was a mistake? You know, if you go back to the simplest
explanation, I think he wanted to give up some of his text messages. By the way, I got it. This is a
caveat. We don't know if we got them all. But what we got is pretty valuable. You have said these
texts provide irrefutable, time-stamped proof of a comprehensive plot at all levels of government to
overturn the election. Irrefutable. Irrefutable. Early in the text messages, they were talking about
alternate electors, you know, I think as soon as November 5th or November 6th. Right off the bat.
Come on. The first mention of January 6th was two days after the election. Donald Trump Jr. wrote
the White House Chief of Staff, this is what we need to do, and laid out a rambling scheme to seat
alternate electors. A plot the Department of Justice is investigating. We get Trump electors, he
wrote in part. It gets kicked to Congress 6th January 2021. Once again, he concludes Trump wins.
Many other texts were of bizarre election conspiracies, Chinese plots to install President Biden, in
treaties to seize voting machines as part of God's plan, even a call from Republican lawmakers for
President Trump to declare martial law and stay in power. From the sheer number of texts, it seems
almost half the world had Mark Meadows phone number. The Meadows text messages show you an
administration that was completely eaten up with a digital virus called QAnon and conspiracy
theories and apocalyptic messianic buffoonery. You can look at the text messages as that roadmap,
but it's also a look into the psyche of the Republican Party today. People in the Republican Party
would say, you're an opponent. You're the opposition. Of course you're going to say this. I would
tell them this. I'm not their enemy. I'm just a guy trying to tell you that the data doesn't support
that the election was stolen. We'll be first started here. Denver Riggleman III is a proud son of
Virginia. He told us his family never questioned going to church or voting Republican. How many
Apple Action Boy, man? In 2013, he settled here on 50 green acres in the Blue Ridge Mountains of
Virginia, outside Charlottesville, where he helped his wife, Christine, pursue her dream of opening
a distillery. It smells delicious. You want to eat the air? It was Christine's bourbon that got him
into politics, frustrated with high liquor taxes and government red tape. He made an unsuccessful
run for governor in 2017. Soon a seat opened up in Virginia's conservative 5th congressional
district. He ran and to his surprise, he won. And in 2018, found himself in the seat once held by
James Madison. The accidental congressman I called myself. A Republican with a libertarian bent, he
joined the Freedom Caucus, the most conservative wing of the party. He voted with President Trump
92% of the time, but says his loyalty was questioned because he'd sometimes reach across the aisle
to work with Democrats. Christine told us the beginning of the end was when Denver decided to
officiate the wedding of two gay campaign workers. So you're this staunch conservative and you
officiate at the same sex way? Yeah, Christine's driving us, because you know, honey, you might have
the shortest political career in the history of Virginia. I said it'll blow over in two weeks. What
happened? It didn't blow over. You know, it was brutal. What did you think of how he reacted to the
criticism? I think he stood his ground and he doesn't regret doing it. He told us he also doesn't
regret calling white supremacists cultural parasites after they marched on Charlottesville. QAnon
and the conspiracy theories it promotes are a danger in it. Or denouncing QAnon from the floor of
Congress. They were spreading this rumor that because of the gay wedding that I was trying to change
a sexual orientation of children, you know, that really is a QAnon based conspiracy theory. But his
independence riled the Republican base. He lost his seed in 2020 to a Republican further to his
right. Do you consider yourself a Republican today? No. No. I left the Republican Party. I'm
independent. I don't even want to call it independent. I'm unaffiliated. I'm just me. And this now
unaffiliated ex-congressman had a skill set that caught the attention of the January 6th committee.
He joined the staff in August of last year. Rigolman's data team was first to identify a telephone
number in Meadows, Texas, belonging to Ginny Thomas, wife of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas.
Thomas texted links tied to QAnon, including this one, saying, the Biden crime family and ballot
fraud co-conspirators are being arrested and detained and will be living in barges off Guantanamo
Bay to face military tribunals for sedition. She added, I hope this is true. What did you think of
those Ginny Thomas texts? Actually, as far as academically, it was hell-aciously insightful.
Insightful in what way? Insightful about how the conspiracy theories and sort of this digital virus
had really metastasized in the GOP. You make it sound like an infection? It is an infection. But
Ginny Thomas specifically, I'd see somebody like that who has that type of access to the president
and Mary to Supreme Court Justice pushing that type of nonsense to the chief of staff to the
president. That should be an eye-opener for everybody. Rigolman left the committee last April. He
told us one reason. They wouldn't subpoena Ginny Thomas. The committee provided 60 minutes of
statement that reads, in part, Mr. Rigolman had limited knowledge of the committee's investigation.
He departed prior to our most important investigative work. The committee has run down all the leads
that arose from his work. Last week, Ginny Thomas agreed to be interviewed. Yeah. It's a really
mapped to an attempted coup. The Denver Rigolman said he learned from texts provided by Mark Meadows
at 60 minutes over time.com, sponsored by Pfizer.