 In a major escalation of the war in Europe, Russian President Vladimir Putin announced Friday he is
annexing about 20 percent of Ukraine. The region, in the east and in the south, is only partly
controlled by Russia because of a Ukrainian counter-offensive. In a belligerent speech, Putin
referred to nuclear weapons and accused the West of Satanism. He vowed that the territory will be
Russian forever. President Biden responded that the U.S. will never recognize the annexation and
will support Ukraine's military as long as it takes. Seven months of war have been catastrophic for
Ukrainian families, many of whom turn for hope to Olinna Zelenska. The first lady of Ukraine was
trained as an architect, made a living as a comedy writer, but a woke last February to a tragedy.
Overnight she became an ambassador, a mourner, and the healer of a nation fighting for its life. The
story will continue in a moment. We met in the capital, Kiev, at a location we agreed not to
disclose. The day of our interview, Ukraine was forcing a Russian retreat. And exposing the horrors
of the invasion. What have the families of Ukraine lost? Half our families are separated, she told
us. Because someone is at the front, someone went abroad to save their children, someone is under
Russian occupation. People are afraid to leave their homes because of shelling. They're afraid to
even try to evacuate. We have thousands of dead. Hundreds of children are dead. We were just in
Cherneyev. We saw the soccer stadium had been bombed, the library, a hospital, public school number
18, public school number 21. What are the Russians trying to do? They tried to frighten people to
make them run, to have towns and villages empty, so they can occupy these territories. Is it warfare
or is it terrorism? Definitely terrorism. The war is being waged using modern means, but from the
moral and ethical point of view, it's the Middle Ages. Elena Zelenska is 44 years old, married 19
years to her husband, President Volodomir Zelensky. Her names differ because in Slavic languages,
surnames are often modified by gender. When we spoke to her husband in early April, he told us his
wife and two children were in hiding, but weeks later, he deployed his wife like a weapon. In May,
she showed first lady Jill Biden, the war's homeless in Western Ukraine. In July, she came to
Washington and became the first lady to address the U.S. Congress. I'm asking for weapons, she said
then. Weapons that would not be used to wage war on somebody else's land, but to protect one's home
and the right to wake up alive in that home. When we met, we noticed what seemed like a weariness
she was determined to ignore. It was the price of the path she'd chosen to meet her people, know
their pain, and bear the weight of empathy. We met a man in Buccia yesterday. He and his family were
fleeing the Russian invasion. The Russians opened fire on his car. His leg was destroyed, the car
caught fire, and he watched his wife and children burn to death. I find it hard to express the
enormity of what's happening, and I wonder how you express the suffering of your people. I feel like
a part of these people. I feel as if this is my pain. The stories are terrifying, and we try to
somehow help the survivors. You just told me this man in Buccia had lost his leg. Well, a girl Sasha
lost her arm. Now she's in the United States. I started a program with the Ukraine House in
Washington, and with many American philanthropists and American doctors and hospitals, we found an
opportunity to give the girl an artificial prosthesis. But every time she looks at her hands, she
will see what she has lost. Sasha will always see what she lost in this war. The world has watched
as Ukraine has lost entire cities. Nearly 500 hospitals and clinics have been hit. Schools are
devastated. Mrs. Zelenska told us about 150 schools simply do not exist. About 900 schools have been
damaged. We saw what she means in Cherneheav, about three hours north of Kiev. Public school 21 was
used as a shelter when a Russian bomb struck. We asked some of those who were there to join us. Why
would the Russians bomb a school? In a Lebcchenko, the school principal told us, I thought it was a
safe place for all of us. We even wrote the word children on the windows. This is principal
Lebcchenko, who lost vision in one eye. Natalia Horbach was sheltering with her two boys. My face
and my ear were injured. My head and my right arm were cut with some fragments. A man came over and
helped me up and took me to a car that drove us to the hospital. When he helped me stand up, I asked
him about the... She couldn't quite say the word children. My grandson's heart was still beating.
They were giving him medical assistance. But a lot of time was lost and he died in the ambulance
near the house. My granddaughter, Perfiance, my daughter's husband and my mother were found dead in
the rubble. Public school 21 in Chernehyve had 850 students. How are you educating the children of
Ukraine today? Around 3500 schools will operate online only because schools cannot receive students
and because their parents are afraid to send their children to school. Ukraine's children went to
school this year and the first thing they learned is where the bomb shelter is, how to get there and
what to do in case of missile strikes. We will fight, we will not give our children up. I don't know
how we can forgive this. I don't think we will. After the Russians severed communications with the
occupied territories, Ukrainians dropped messages in the knee-prow river with the current and
against the chance. They would reach those behind the new iron curtain. We really hope that our love
letters were received by someone there and that they hear us. I truly hope our people will endure.
We will never give up our people. And by the way, there's this idea of giving up territory and some
kind of negotiation. Our people are there. We will never betray them. That is not negotiable in the
view of your government. I really don't want to express political opinions. That's not my role. But
imagine a situation where you've been attacked by bandits. They're threatening you, killing your
children. And someone suggests maybe it would be better to negotiate. That is impossible now. This
is just my opinion as a citizen of Ukraine. Olena Zelenska dated her future husband in college. She
became a writer on Zelenski's comedy shows. In a sitcom called Servant of the People, he played a
teacher who was elected president of Ukraine. He turned parody into power in 2019 when he actually
ran and won 73% of the vote. The Zelenskies have an 18-year-old daughter and nine-year-old son. Are
you stronger than you thought you were? Everyone has become stronger. I'm not unique. You survive
and going through trials you automatically become stronger. So yes, we're getting stronger, but will
that help us? I hope so. This is a bumper sticker where I buy my groceries. I took this picture on
the east side of Manhattan. This is a baseball game in Denver, Colorado. And this is from Florida as
well. What do you say to the American people? I can say I really feel the support. When I was in
Washington, I was handed a short letter written by a guy named Hector. He's a teenager 14 years old.
He wrote me a short letter with words of support. By the way, if possible and Hector sees this
program, I would like to tell him. The Hector, I remember it. I took your letter with me to Ukraine
and it was charming and it was extremely touching. So it seems to me that normal people understand
what evil is and that the attacker is evil. That it is normal to defend your country, your children,
your homes. I'm sure that Americans themselves are like that. What does the future hold? We are
dreaming about this. Over these months we've seen the human being is the center of everything. This
is what makes us different from the aggressor. They don't count their dead. We count every person
who died and we want everyone still alive to feel confident and to have opportunities to grow.
That's what we dream about. That's how we want to see our country in the future.