Tonight, you’re going to hear from a  former senior staffer inside the January  
6th committee — which resumes public hearings  on the Capitol siege Wednesday. Members of the  
committee aren’t happy that Denver Riggleman,  an experienced military intelligence officer  
and former Republican congressman, is talking  to 60 Minutes about the work he did for them.  
Nor are they thrilled he’s written a book about  his time on the committee, called “The Breach.”  
Riggleman has a history of swimming against the  tide. Once a member of the ultra-conservative  
House Freedom Caucus, he was endorsed twice by  then-President Trump, but after hearing what  
Denver Riggleman has to say tonight, it’s unlikely  the former president will be buying his book.
Bill Whitaker:  
Aha moment
Did it hit you at one point that this is way  bigger than it appeared in the beginning?
Denver Riggleman: Absolutely. You  get a real "A-ha" moment when you  
see that the White House switchboard  had connected to a rioter's phone  
while it's happening. That's a  big, pretty big "A-ha" moment.
Bill Whitaker: Wait a minute:  
Someone in the White House was calling one  of the rioters while the riot was going on?
Denver Riggleman: On January 6th, absolutely.
Bill Whitaker: And you know  who both ends of that call?
Denver Riggleman: I only know one end of  that call. I don't know the White House end,  
which I believe is more important. But the  thing is the American people need to know  
that there are link connections  that need to be explored more.
As senior technical adviser for the  January 6th committee, Denver Riggleman,  
a former House Republican and ex- military  intelligence officer, ran a data-driven  
operation pursuing phone records and other  digital clues tied to the attack on the Capitol.
Denver Riggleman: From my perspective,  you know, being in counterterrorism,  
you know, if the White House, even if it's  a short call, and it's a connected call,  
who is actually making that phone call?
Bill Whitaker: Is there a simple,  innocent explanation for that?
Denver Riggleman: Was it an accidental call?  When the White House just happened to call  
numbers that somebody misdialed a rioter  that day, on January 6th? Probably not.
Rigglemans background
Denver Riggleman told us he uncovered a lot  of disquieting information for the committee.
Republican vice chair Liz Cheney recommended  the former conservative congressman for the  
staff — partly for his political experience,  but mostly for his technical expertise.
Denver Riggleman: I think Liz and  some of the other people recognized,  
"He does know how Congress works, he  knows how the political system works:  
He was in the Freedom Caucus, but he also  has a background in data intelligence."
For two decades he served as an  Air Force intelligence officer,  
a contractor for the secretive National Security  Agency and ran his own data analysis firm.
When the January 6th committee came calling,  
he assembled a small squad of data miners  and analysts, like he’d had in the military,  
to comb through 20 million lines of  data: e-mails, social media posts,  
phone records, texts, anything to learn who  did what leading up to and on January 6th.
Denver Riggleman: We were able to do  things I think in a way that had never  
been done before with millions of lines  of data. And to actually create a graph  
that shows how these groups actually intermingled.
Bill Whitaker: Now you were able to identify,  
I believe, six "centers of gravity?” Denver Riggleman: Yeah. There are six  
pretty big centers of gravity, or six groups that  we looked at. Really, it came down to Trump team,  
Trump family, rally goers, unaffiliated  DOJ-charged defendants, Proud Boys and Oath  
Keepers, and others, which are state legislators,  alternate electors, things like that. So when you  
have those six groups of people, you can actually  start looking at the connections between them.
Once he started connecting the  dots this complex graph emerged,  
which he presented to the committee. Each thick  line represents tens-of-thousands of calls and  
contacts among and between the groups. These are  calls and texts from just one person of interest.  
Multiply that hundreds of times and you end up  with this graph Riggleman calls “the monster.”
Denver Riggleman: We don't have text content.  What we do have is how long they talked,  
when they talked. That is very important. And  really does suggest that there was much more  
coordination than the American public can  even imagine when it came to January 6th.
Bianca Gracia
For example, the data revealed  five calls in the weeks before  
January 6th between the White House and a  stop-the-steal activist named Bianca Gracia.
The committee obtained video from  the evening of January 5th. Gracia  
was part of a clandestine meeting with the  heads of the Proud Boys and Oath Keepers,  
the paramilitary groups that would  breach the Capitol the next day.
Denver Riggleman: And, you know, when you have  the White House switchboard and certain other  
cell phone numbers connected to Bianca Gracia,  that is a link that needs to be investigated.  
The thread that needs to be pulled, is  identifying all the White House numbers,  
and why we have certain specific people,  why they were talking to the White House.
White House phone records
Specific White House phone records  are kept secret to protect every  
administration. But in his book, “The  Breach,” Riggleman wrote he begged the  
committee to push harder to identify  numbers that showed up on the monster.
Denver Riggleman: I was one  of those individuals, sadly,  
at the beginning, you know, where  I was very, very aggressive about  
these linked connections; getting  those White House phone numbers.
Bill Whitaker: Did you express those  concerns to the committee at the time?
Denver Riggleman: Yes.
Bill Whitaker: What was the response?
Denver Riggleman: The response was,  
"Go forth and just do the best you  can with the resources that we have."
Riggleman requested $3.2 million  -- but only received a fraction  
of that. His team burrowed into the data.
The mother lode dropped into their laps  – not just phone records, but more than  
2,000 actual texts to and from Mark Meadows,  former President Trump’s chief of staff. There  
were numbers, but no names, so, riggleman  told us, his team made a giant spreadsheet  
painstakingly identifying the people  behind each number – and when they did,  
they were privy to the real time thoughts of  Trump family members, former cabinet secretaries,  
members of Congress, conspiracy mongers,  even a Supreme Court justice’s wife.
Bill Whitaker: You've called the texts  from President Trump's Chief of Staff,  
Mark Meadows "the Crown Jewels." Why?
Denver Riggleman: It was a roadmap. You  know, it showed actually the evolution  
of the beginning arguments from alternate  electors all the way through rally planning,  
all the way to day of. It showed conspiracy  theories. It showed the saturation of QAnon.
Bill Whitaker: How'd you get 'em?
Denver Riggleman: He gave 'em up.
Bill Whitaker: Do you think it was a mistake?
Denver Riggleman: You know, if you  go back to the simplest explanation,  
I think he wanted to give up some of  his text messages. By the way, I got a,  
this is a caveat: We don't know if we got  'em all. But what we got is pretty valuable.
Bill Whitaker: You have said, "These texts  provide irrefutable, time-stamped proof of a  
comprehensive plot at all levels of government  to overturn the election." "Irrefutable?"
Denver Riggleman: Irrefutable. Early in  the text messages they were talking about  
alternate electors, you know, I think  as soon as November 5th or November 6th.
Bill Whitaker: Right off the bat.
Denver Riggleman: Come on. Right off the bat.
The first mention of January 6th was  two days after the election. Donald  
Trump Jr. wrote the White House chief of staff,  
“this is what we need to do,” and laid out a  rambling scheme to seat alternate electors,  
a plot the department of justice is investigating.  “We get Trump electors,” he wrote in part… “it  
gets kicked to Congress 6 January 2021.” …  “once again,” he concludes, “Trump wins.”
Many other texts were of bizarre election  conspiracies: Chinese plots to install  
President Biden … entreaties to seize voting  machines as part of God’s plan … even a call  
from Republican lawmakers for President Trump  to declare martial law and stay in power.  
From the sheer number of texts, it seems almost  half the world had Mark Meadows’ phone number.
Denver Riggleman: The Meadows text messages show  you an administration that was completely eaten up  
with a digital virus called QAnon and conspiracy  theories: an apocalyptic, Messianic buffoonery,  
You can look at the text messages as that roadmap,  
but it's also a look into the psyche  of the Republican Party today.
Bill Whitaker: People in the Republican  Party would say, “You're an opponent,  
you're the opposition. Of  course you're gonna say this."
Denver Riggleman: I would tell  them this: I'm not their enemy,  
I'm just a guy who's trying to tell you that the  data doesn't support that the election was stolen.
Denver Riggleman III
Denver Riggleman III is a proud  son of Virginia. He told us his  
family never questioned going  to church or voting Republican.
Denver Riggleman: I’m an Appalchian boy, man.
In 2013, he settled here on 50 green  acres in the Blue Ridge Mountains  
of Virginia outside Charlottesville,  where he helped his wife, Christine,  
pursue her dream of opening a distillery.
Bill Whitaker: This smells delicious.
Denver Riggleman: You wanna eat the air.
It was Christine’s Bourbon that got  him into politics. Frustrated with  
high liquor taxes and government red tape, he  made an unsuccessful run for governor in 2017.  
Soon, a seat opened up in Virginia's conservative  fifth congressional district. He ran,  
and to his surprise, he won, and in 2018 found  himself in the seat once held by James Madison.
Denver Riggleman: "The Accidental  Congressman" I called myself.
A Republican with a libertarian bent, he joined  the Freedom Caucus, the most conservative wing  
of the party. He voted with President Trump 92%  of the time, but says his loyalty was questioned  
because he’d sometimes reach across the aisle  to work with Democrats. Christine told us the  
beginning of the end was when Denver decided to  officiate the wedding of two gay campaign workers.
Bill Whitaker: So you're  this staunch conservative,  
and you officiate at a same-sex wedding?
Denver Riggleman: Yeah, Christine's driving  there. She goes, “You know honey, you might have  
the shortest political career in the history of  Virginia." I said, "It'll blow over in two weeks."
Bill Whitaker: What happened? Christine Riggleman: It didn't blow over.
Denver Riggleman: No. It was, it was brutal.
Bill Whitaker: What'd you think of  how he reacted to the criticism?  
Christine Riggleman: I think he stood his  ground, and he doesn't regret doing it.
He told us he also doesn’t regret calling  white supremacists “cultural parasites”  
after they marched on Charlottesville. Or  denouncing QAnon from the floor of Congress.
Denver Riggleman: They were spreading this  rumor that because of the gay wedding,  
that I was trying to change the  sexual orientation of children.  
You know, that, that really is  a QAnon-based conspiracy theory.
But his independence riled the  Republican base. He lost his  
seat in 2020 to a Republican further to his right.
Bill Whitaker: Do you consider  yourself a Republican today?
Denver Riggleman: No. No. I  left the Republican party. I'm  
Independent. And I don't even want to call it  "Independent." I'm unaffiliated. I'm just me.
And this now unaffiliated ex-congressman had  a skill set that caught the attention of the  
January 6th committee. He joined  the staff in August of last year.
Riggleman’s data team was first to identify a  telephone number in Meadows’ texts belonging  
to Ginni Thomas – wife of Supreme Court  Justice Clarence Thomas. Thomas texted  
links tied to QAnon, including this one  saying the “Biden crime family & ballot  
fraud co-conspirators … are being arrested  & detained … & will be living in barges off  
Guantanamo Bay to face military tribunals for  sedition …” she added, “I hope this is true.”
Bill Whitaker: What did you think  of those Ginni Thomas texts?
Denver Riggleman: Actually as far as  academically, it was hellaciously insightful.
Bill Whitaker: Insightful in what way? Denver Riggleman: Insightful about how  
the conspiracy theories and, sort of, this, this  digital virus had really metastasized in the GOP.
Bill Whitaker: You make it  sound like an infection.
Denver Riggleman: It is an infection.  But Ginni Thomas, specifically,  
to see somebody like that who has that type  of access to the president and married to  
a Supreme Court justice pushing that type of  nonsense to the chief of staff to the president,  
that's, that should be an  eye opener for everybody.
Committee statement
Riggleman left the committee last  April. He told us one reason,  
they wouldn’t subpoena Ginni Thomas. The committee provided 60 Minutes a statement  
that reads in part: "Mr. Riggleman had limited  knowledge of the committee's investigation.  
He departed… prior to… our most important  investigative work… the committee has run  
down all the leads that arose from his work." Last week, Ginni Thomas agreed to be interviewed.